---
title: Machine Learning Math
draft: false
date: 2025-09-27
author: Sayak Chowdhury
---
##### Groups.
**Def.** A set $G$ of elements with an operation $+: G \to G$ is called a *group* if the following properties hold:
1. Associativity : $\forall a,b,c \in G \quad (a+b)+c=a+(b+c)$
2. Identity : $\exists e \in G \quad \forall g \in G$ s.t. $e+g=g+e=g$
3. Inverse : $\forall a \in G \quad \exists b \in G$ s.t. $a+b=b+a=e$

The group is called a commutative (Abelian) group if we have additionally 
$$
\forall a, b \in G \quad a+b=b+a
$$ 
Example: $S_n \coloneqq \{\pi : \{1, \dots, n\} \to \{1, \dots, n\} \mid \pi \text{ is bijective}\}$


##### Fields.
**Def.** A set $F$ with 2 operations $+, * : F \times F \to F$ is called a *field* if the following properties hold:
1. $(F, +)$ is a commutative group with identity element 0
2. $(F \setminus \{ 0 \}, *)$ is also a commutative group with identity element 1
3. Distributivity: $\forall a, b, c \in F \quad a*(b+c)=a*b + a*c$

Example: For a $n \in \mathbb{Z}$ consider $\mathbb{Z}_n \coloneqq \{ 0, 1, \dots, n-1 \}$ such that $a +_n b \coloneqq (a+b) \mod{n}$, $a *_n b \coloneqq (a*b)\mod n$. Then $(\mathbb{Z}, +_n, *_n)$ is a field iff $n$ is prime.


##### Vector Space.
**Def.** Let $F$ be a field with identity elements 0 and 1. A vector space over the field $F$ is a set $V$ with a mapping $+ : V \times V \to V$ and $* : V \times V \to V$ then:
1. $(V, t)$ is a commutative group
2. Multiplicative identity : $\forall v \in V \quad i*v = v$
3. Distributive property : $\forall a, b \in F$ and $\forall u, v \in V$ such that $a(u+v)=au + av$ and $(a+b)u=au+bv$

>[!info] Function Spaces:
>
>$\mathbb{R}^\mathcal{X} \coloneqq \{ f : \mathcal{X} \to \mathbb{R} \}$ represents the space of all real valued functions on a set $\mathcal{X}$
>
>$$
>\begin{gather*}
> + : \mathbb{R}^\mathcal{X} \times \mathbb{R}^\mathcal{X} \to \mathbb{R}^\mathcal{X}\\
>(f+g)(x) \coloneqq f(x) + g(x)\\
>\\
> * : \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R}^\mathcal{X} \to \mathbb{R}^\mathcal{X}\\
>(\lambda f)(x) \coloneqq \lambda f(x)
>\end{gather*}
>$$
>
>$\mathcal{C}(\mathcal{X}) \coloneqq \{ f : \mathcal{X} \to \mathbb{R} \mid f \text{ is constant} \}$
>
>$\mathcal{C}([a, b]) \coloneqq \{ f : [a,b] \to \mathbb{R} \mid f \text{ is constant difference} \}$

##### Subspace.
**Def.** Let $V$ be a vector space, $U \subset V$ non-empty set, we call $U$ a subspace of $V$ if it is closed under linear combination:
$$
\forall \lambda, \mu \in F \quad \forall u, v \in V \quad \lambda u + \mu v \in U
$$ 

##### Linear Combination.
**Def.** $V$ vector space over $F$, $u_1, \dots, u_n \in V$, $\lambda_1, \dots, \lambda_n \in F$ then $\sum_{i=1}^n \lambda_i v_i$ is called a *Linear Combination*. The set of all linear combinations of $u_1, \dots, u_n \in V$ is called the *span* (linear hull) of $u_1, \dots, u_n \in V$.
$$
\text{Span}(u_1, \dots, u_n) \coloneqq \left\{ \sum_{i=1}^n \lambda_i u_i \mid \lambda_i \in F \right\}
$$ 
The set $U \coloneqq \{u_1, \dots, u_n\}$ is the *generator* of Span($u_1, \dots, u_n$). To find good generators, we need to know what is linear independence and dependence. 

##### Linear Independence.
**Def.** A set of vectors $v_1, \dots, v_n$ is called linearly independent if $\sum^n_{i=1} \lambda_i v_i =0 \implies \lambda_1 = \lambda_2 = \dots = \lambda_n = 0$

##### Basis.
**Def.** A subset $B$ of a vector space $V$ is called a (Hamel) basis if:
1. $\text{Span}(B) = V$
2. $B$ is linearly independent

**Proposition.** If $U=\{ u_1, \dots, u_n \}$ spans a vector space $V$, then the set $U$ can be reduced to the basis of $V$.

**Proof.** 
- If $U$ is already linearly independent : Done
- If $U$ is dependent : there exists $a \in U$ that is a linear combination of other vectors in $U$, we remove it.
- We keep removing all $a$ until the remaining set is linearly independent $\blacksquare$


**Def.** A vector space is called finite dimensional if it contains a finite basis.

**Prop.** Let $U = \{ u_1, \dots, u_n \} \subset V$ be a set of linearly independent vectors and $V$ be a finite dimensional vector space, then $U$ can be extended to a basis of $V$.

**Proof. (Sketch)**
Let $w_1, \dots, w_n$ be basis of $V$. Consider the set $\{ u_1, \dots, u_n, w_1, \dots, w_n \}$. Remove vectors from the set until remaining vectors are linearly independent.

**Corollary.** Let $V$ be a finite dimensional vector space then any two basis of $V$ have the same length.


##### Dimension.
**Def.** The length of the basis of a finite dimensional vector space is called the *dimension* of $V$.
