---
title: Opinion on Opinions
draft: true
date: 2025-03-18
author: Sayak Chowdhury
---

>[!note]
>The following is an exceedingly opinionated write-up on how I feel opinions are formed, or at least how I tend to form opinions. Venture forth at your own peril.


### How do we quantify?

Opinions are generally reflective of some aspect of the personally held beliefs of a person. Is there any way to quantify what these personally held beliefs are for any person at any given time? There does not seem to be any better alternative to probing the nature and extent of a person's beliefs than by asking them pointed questions. Of course in a traditional human setting, we are more likely to pick up non-verbal cues and subtle factors that may betray their inner beliefs, however determining a person's conscious beliefs purely by these factors is far more complicated than asking direct questions. A person may have contradictory beliefs or hope to obfuscate their beliefs in well-meaning jargon, but for a sufficiently large set of directed questions it might be possible to ascertain the truth nature of a person's opinions. The set of questions have to be complete and countable. *Complete* is the sense that they have to be capable of accounting for the entire breadth of the human experience and *Countable* in the sense that they cannot be redundant and infinitely recursive with regards to some specific topic. These questions will form our foundational blocks upon which we can propose a method of distilling a person's opinions. The questions within this framework has to be an **agree-or-disagree** type question where the degree of agreement/disagreement can be modulated. 

We generally try not to have specific preformed opinions that are dug-in, and as a result attempt to form an opinion based on some overarching consensus. Of course, this would be an entirely ideal scenario which is almost always not the case. Every person living or dead will have some internal inclinations about almost everything. This is the result of what could be a combination of their uniquely individual upbringing and innate nature to an extent. These things are difficult to quantize in any legitimate sense. So we can generally treat these 'inclinations' as the **initial-beliefs vector** $\Lambda$ used to preserve the person's identity when reshaped through their changing opinions. This may be a large vector in some $\mathbb{R}^n$ space that contains specific axes along which we measure some $n$ metrics, each telling us something about the person. Any random initial belief vector can be represented in the following manner:
$$
\Lambda = 
\begin{pmatrix}
\lambda_1\\
\lambda_2\\
\lambda_3\\
\vdots\\
\lambda_n\\
\end{pmatrix} =
\begin{pmatrix}
0.01\\
-2.83\\
6.00\\
\vdots\\
1.39\\
\end{pmatrix}
$$  
Where each $\Lambda_i \in \mathbb{R}$ is a factor that contributes to forming the initial belief when going into an opinion-formation process. For a more concrete example, we can take an initial belief of some person as relating to **cats**:
$$
\Lambda^\text{(cats)} =
\begin{pmatrix}
4.00\\
1.01\\
-2.93\\
\vdots\\
0.01
\end{pmatrix}
\begin{matrix}
\begin{align*}
&\; &\rightarrow &\text{ Are they cute?} \\
&\; &\rightarrow &\text{ Would you adopt one?}\\
&\; &\rightarrow &\text{ Like animals in general?}\\
&\; &\vdots& \\
&\; &\rightarrow &\text{ Any relatives with cats?}
\end{align*}
\end{matrix}
$$ 
Each element $\Lambda_i$ of the initial belief vector represents a contributing factor that is measured over $\mathbb{R}$ and the overall opinion is a combination of these values corresponding to different axes that can be quantified appropriately. The initial-beliefs vector contains a stacking of multiple such metrics, some combination of which is used to express an opinion. While updating and refining an opinion or stance on some specific topic, involvement of all metrics might not be necessary; therefore, we may construct a smaller  $\mathbb{R}^m \; (m \ll n)$ vector that will participate in the opinion-formation process to update specific metrics in the larger vector. 

In doing so, we represent a subset of their initial-beliefs as a $\mathbb{R}^m$ vector that is to be updated. This vector (say $\Lambda^\prime$ ) is updated over multiple iterations in order to simulate evolving opinions and beliefs over time. The vector $\Lambda^\prime$ can, therefore, represent the beliefs that any person may hold when going into an iteration of opinion-formation. In cases where someone may not have any initial-beliefs regarding some matter, we can have $\Lambda^\prime=\vec{0}$. 